# Build a system from scratch

This guide describes how to build an operating system **from scratch**.
If you are just willing to quickly install a system, the best option is to use the [installer](../installer.md).

> An intermediate system (such as a Linux distribution) is required to perform the installation from scratch.



# BIOS setup

While the kernel partially supports UEFI, it must boot using the legacy bios.

This is due to the fact that the only way the kernel currently uses to display informations on the screen is via the VGA text mode, which is not supported under UEFI.

Make sure legacy boot is enabled in your BIOS, or the kernel will not show anything on screen.



## Kernel compilation

## Configuration

The configuration file is mandatory to build the kernel. It specifies which features are enabled.

A default configuration is available in the file `default.config.toml`. To use it, simply type the command:

```sh
cp default.config.toml config.toml
```



## Build

After creating the configuration, the kernel can be built using the following commands:

```sh
cargo build               # Debug mode
cargo build --release     # Release mode
```

The default architecture is `x86`. To specify an other architecture, add the following parameter to the build command: `--target arch/<arch>/<arch>.json`, where `<arch>` is the selected architecture.

The list of available architecture can be retrieved by typing:

```
ls -1 arch/
```



# Disk creation (QEMU)

> This section is for QEMU only. If building for a physical machine, skip it.

A disk can be created using the command:

```
dd if=/dev/zero of=qemu_disk count=1G status=progress
```

The `count` option can be tweaked to modify the size of the disk.



# Disk preparation

## Create partition table

> If you don't plan to install a bootloader, this section can be skipped.

The partition table can be created using the `fdisk` command.

Example:
```sh
fdisk /dev/sdX
```

where `X` is the letter associated to the disk on which you want to install the system.

> Be careful! This is a destructive operating. Selecting the wrong disk might corrupt your system

Either GPT (recommended) or MBR partition tables can be used.

It is recommended to create a least two partitions:
- a boot partition for GRUB (approximatively 200MB)
- a main partition for the system



## Create filesystems

For each partition, create a filesystem using the `mkfs` command.

If you don't have a partition table, you can just create a filesystem on the whole disk.

Example:
```sh
mkfs.ext2 /dev/sdXX
```

> Be careful! This is a destructive operating. Selecting the wrong disk or partition might corrupt your system

The only filesystem that is currently supported is `ext2`.



# Build the system

Now comes the moment to populate the filesystem.

First, mount the **main partition**'s filesystem:

```sh
mkdir mnt
mount <device file> mnt
```

When building for QEMU, use the `qemu_disk` file as device file.



## Files hierarchy

Create a UNIX system files hierarchy:

```sh
mkdir -pv mnt/{bin,boot,dev,etc,home,lib,media,mnt,opt,proc,root,run,sbin,srv,sys,tmp,usr,var}
mkdir -pv mnt/etc/{opt,sysconfig}
mkdir -pv mnt/lib/firmware
mkdir -pv mnt/media/{floppy,cdrom}
mkdir -pv mnt/run/{lock,log}
mkdir -pv mnt/usr/{bin,include,lib,local,sbin,share,src}
mkdir -pv mnt/usr/share/{color,dict,doc,info,locale,man,misc,terminfo,zoneinfo}
mkdir -pv mnt/usr/local/{bin,include,lib,sbin,share,src}
mkdir -pv mnt/usr/local/share/{color,dict,doc,info,locale,man,misc,terminfo,zoneinfo}
mkdir -pv mnt/var/{cache,lib,local,log,mail,opt,spool}
mkdir -pv mnt/var/lib/{color,misc,locate}
```



## Install packages

You can decide to compile and install packages by hand, or you can use [maestro's package manager](https://github.com/llenotre/blimp).

The minimum recommended packages are:
- `bash`: shell
- `blimp`: package manager
- `coreutils`: GNU coreutils
- `maestro-ps2`: keyboard driver
- `maestro-utils`: system utility commands
- `solfege`: the boot system

Make sure to **cross compile** packages so that they are compatible with the kernel.



## Install the bootloader

> You might skip this section if running the OS using QEMU at the condition that you run the kernel only using the `cargo run` command. This is because GRUB2 is already present in the ISO file that is generated by this command.

If this is not the case, it is recommended to install GRUB2 or any other Multiboot2-compatible bootloader.

First, mount the boot partition:

```sh
mount /dev/sdXX mnt/boot
```

Install GRUB:
```sh
grub-install --target=i386-pc --boot-directory=mnt/boot /dev/sdXX
```

Write the `grub.cfg` file:

```
cat <<EOF >mnt/boot/grub/grub.cfg
menuentry "Maestro" {
	multiboot2 /maestro -root 8 X
}
EOF
```

where `X` is the partition number of the main filesystem, starting at `1`.

Then, copy the kernel you compiled before:

```sh
cp -v target/<arch>/<profile>/maestro mnt/boot/
```



## Set hostname

Set the hostname of the machine my writing it into the `/etc/hostname` file.

```sh
echo "myhostname" >mnt/etc/hostname
```



## Create users and groups

You must at least create the `root` user for the system to work correctly. It is also recommended to create at least one other user with the name of your choice.

TODO



# The end

Finally, unmount the filesystem:

```
umount mnt
```

The OS is now ready to be used! Have fun!
